Getting Started with JavaScript (#12689)
WordPress/gutenberg: docs/designers-developers/developers/tutorials/javascript/troubleshooting.md

## Troubleshooting

It's not working, what do I do?

### Console Log

The console log is a JavaScript developer's best friend, it is a good best practice to work with it open. If there are any errors this is where they will show up. See Mozilla's [JavaScript console](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/What_are_browser_developer_tools#The_JavaScript_console) documentation for more.

Check the JavaScript console for any errors. Here is an example, which shows a syntax error on line 6.

![console error](../../../../../docs/designers-developers/developers/tutorials/javascript/console-error.png)

### Confirm JavaScript is Loading

If you are not seeing your changes, another place to check is to confirm your JavaScript file is being enqueued. You can look at the page source, right-click View Page Source, and look for the `<script>` tag that loads your file. In our example, you would searching for `myguten.js` and confirm it is being loaded.

> If you do not see the file being loaded, doublecheck the enqueue function is correct. You can also check your server logs to see if there is an issue.

Reviewer: Perhaps adding a section about dependencies. Arguably it has been more of a trouble for developers that relied on older versions of Gutenberg that didn't require the plugins to specify them so the change took them by surprise. Can still be useful for new devs, though.

Suggestion: 

---

### Confirm all dependencies are loaded

The console log should show an error if a dependency your JavaScript code uses has not been declared and loaded in the browser. In our example, if `myguten.js` script is enqueued without declaring its dependencies such as:

	wp_enqueue_script( 'myguten-script',
		plugins_url( 'myguten.js', __FILE__ )
	);

the console log will include this error:

![screenshot from 2018-12-11 19-36-00](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/583546/49822139-8a212480-fd7c-11e8-8d77-ff1e36ba54c6.png)

Author: Added. Thanks!

> ## Troubleshooting

Reviewer 2: Should be `#`

> It's not working, what do I do?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're having trouble getting your code to work, here are a few ways to troubleshoot.
```

### Console Log

> The console log is a JavaScript developer's best friend, it is a good practice to work with it open. If there are any errors this is where they will show up. See Mozilla's [JavaScript console](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/What_are_browser_developer_tools#The_JavaScript_console) documentation for more.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The console log is a JavaScript developer's best friend. It is a good practice to work with it open, as it collects errors and notices into one place. See Mozilla's [JavaScript console](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/What_are_browser_developer_tools#The_JavaScript_console) documentation for more.
```

> Check the JavaScript console for any errors. Here is an example, which shows a syntax error on line 6.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your first step in debugging should be to check the JavaScript console for any errors. Here is an example, which shows a syntax error on line 6.
```

![console error](../../../../../docs/designers-developers/developers/tutorials/javascript/console-error.png)

> ### Confirm all dependencies are loaded

Reviewer 2: Can you swap this question below the next one?

> The console log will show an error if a dependency your JavaScript code uses has not been declared and loaded in the browser. In the example, if `myguten.js` script is enqueued without declaring the `wp-block` dependency, the console log will show:

Reviewer 2: Is it `wp-block` or `wp-blocks`?

Author: good catch!

> <img src="../../../../../docs/designers-developers/developers/tutorials/javascript/error-blocks-undefined.png" width=448 title="error wp.blocks is undefined"/>

Reviewer 2: Can we use the markdown image format here?

Author: I tried but the image comes in too wide since it was created on a @2x screen.

Also tried using markdown formatting here: https://gist.github.com/uupaa/f77d2bcf4dc7a294d109 but they didn't work either. 

Open to suggestions, I can size it down but then won't look good on high dpi screens.

> 

Reviewer 2: Extra newline

You can correct by checking your `wp_enqueue_script` function includes all packages listed that are used:

```js
wp_enqueue_script( 'myguten-script',
	plugins_url( 'myguten.js', __FILE__ ),
	array( 'wp-blocks' )
);
```

> 

Reviewer 2: extra newline not needed

> ### Confirm JavaScript is Loading

Reviewer 2: all these questions should be h2, not h3

> If you are not seeing your changes, another place to check is to confirm your JavaScript file is being enqueued. You can look at the page source, right-click View Page Source, and look for the `<script>` tag that loads your file. In our example, you would searching for `myguten.js` and confirm it is being loaded.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are not seeing your changes, check that your JavaScript file is being enqueued. Open the page source in your browser's web inspector (some browsers may allow you to view the page source by right clicking on the page and selecting "View Page Source"), and look for the `<script>` tag that loads your file. In our example, you would search for `myguten.js` and confirm it is being loaded.
```
